---data, datatypes, and variables

john tukey - statistics, computing; 1960's coined term eda. 
spoke of interpretation of results, gathering of data, ease of analysis. 
make mathematics more applicable. 

structured data - tabular format; simplest type of data
unstructured - text, images, audio, video, analog data; needs to be made amenable to further analysis 


data types in computing used to make data understandable to computers


in statistics, variable refers to data that can vary, can possibly take many values. 

qualitative variable - no numerial value; 2 types. categorical. 
1.nominal variables - names of individuals
2.ordinal variables - names but can be ordered: satisfied, very satisfied, etc. 


quantitative variables - numbers.  continuous.
need to convert qualitative to quantitative, so that a computer can process

---central tendency and dispersion

location
central tendency 
dispersion
variation

central tendency  - observations group around middle value
middle value, arithmetic average, mean
susceptiable to extreme values, outliers
median - middle value, order all values, then take middle
mode - most typical value, most often

dispersion - spread around central tendency points

standard deviation - square of variance; gives sense of how far every observation is away from the average

can also look at dispersion through whole range of data
range - max-min, susceptible to outliers, solution: divide data by excluding outliers from calculations

quartile - separates data into 4 pieces
gives idea of central tendency and dispersion

2nd quartile = median
inter quartile range - range in middle 50%, q3-q1.

challange of measuring dispersion: understand how large or small number should be

coefficent of variation - standard devition as percentage of mean, relative to mean, standard deviation expressed as percentage of mean.
 
z-score
how to calibrate measure with respect to distribution
how many standard deviations above the average is an observation
ex: z-score = 1, means 1 standard deviation above the average


--- 5 point summary and skewness of data 

purpose of eda: to describe and summarize 

5 number summary
minimmum
q1 (25%)
q2 (50% or median)
q3 (75%)
maximum

shape of data
refers to is data symmetric?
bell shaped curve, tilted/skewed left/right?

if mean, median, mode all agree, bell curve distribution
ex: if median > mean, skewed upper values; tilted left. 

skewness
mean > median: positive/right-skewed distribution
mean = media: 0 skewness; symmetrical disctribution
mean < median: negative/left-skewed distribution



---box-plot, covariance, and coeff of correlation

boxplot - visual represenation of 5pt summary: min, max, and quantiles
shape of boxplot adapts to level of skewness

1.5 IQR are outliers

multidimensional data (various columns of data)
covariance - measure of association between two variables, if positive both go up (no causation!)
correlation - covariance divided by product of standard deviations 


---what is preprocessing

important followup to eda - makes data ready for downstream analysis
eda + preprocessing, set of steps before building a model
2 most important aspects: missing values, outliers
assumes convert text to data, img to data as been taken care of


